---
layout: post
title:  "Teaching people project management"
date:   2015-03-25 14:11:30
categories: teaching
---

Few weeks ago, I was asked to give several lectures for the new program run by a local organization for entrepreneurship development, Center for Young Entrepreneur. The primary goal this program aims at is making people able to boost their carreer or find a new job that requires a skill set extended to what they are able to do now. For this program, several trending directions were taken, project management among them. Since I've got some experience in both project management and teaching people, and this activity wouldn't take much time, I accepted the offer and set my hands to preparation process.

With the help of coordinator, we planned my schedule, so I had weekly lectures, thus a week to prepare for each of them. Last time I had worked as a teacher, I'd been given similar conditions: one lecture every week, a week to prepare. Since then, I feel very comfortable with such a schedule I got used to earlier, so it actually didn't overburden me this time either.

Project management is well covered theoretical domain. Since I wasn't the only lecturer, we the teachers occasionally agreed on the source of knowledge, and the [Project Management Body of Knowledge](http://www.pmi.org/PMBOK-Guide-and-Standards.aspx) has been taken as the main source. It covers the project management domain comprehensively, if not extensively. And it's easy to interpret and push through the prism of practical experience.

The first time I met the students, it was all excitement. Guys are awesome listeners and ask uncommon questions. I had great experience and even learned much, since the questions made me think a lot and hypercompensate. I believe if it happens then it wasn't a waste of time for both parties, and everybody gained experience, including the teached himself.

One of the students has been working in construction engineering and city building for decades, and now he wants to get promoted and get a less operational and higher-level position. What he's asked was deeply interlaced with the industry he's expert in. Like, what if cost of the material changes with time, if the contract provides postponed payments at the price at delivery day: should it be registered in a form of a risk or reserved regularly as a price rounded up according to the rules that are accepted within the cost management plan.

Another student was a woman who wants to launch a café and decided to get ready and learn the process beforehand. She, as other students do, had a homework mock project that should have been carried through all the steps she learned. Since PMBoK doesn't cover certain business and its features, there were a lot of questions about how to deal with landlords and cooks, those who have marginal interests and twist manager's arm to account for less and bill for more. Those people's behaviour models aren't what I'm good at, despite I've dealt with similar audience, like carpenters and electricians, during the new office construction (that's another topic, though). It helped us literally write out questions, from general to very specific ones, that she should be ready to ask and get answers. Hope she's going to succeed.

Since each course within the program is iterant and repeats each two months, I hope to get into this again and meet new students who's ready to grind and create and get over all the hard things.

I believe people who teach (whether they are loving it or not) develops faster. When you teach somebody, it's likely you'll be asked a question you'd never even imagine you might. It's a shared struggle. Not only students try their best to attain the knowledge and practical proficiency, but the teacher get a powerful boost to her skills and expertise. So my advice for everybody is if you want to learn something then first start from explaining it to another person and then slowly move towards larger audiences and higher responsibility (just explaining doesn't mean you influence one's career, you know). Another one is that if you aren't ready to answer hard questions, it's unlikely you're ready for an interesting and touch problem (which often pays correlatively hgih), so try to turn the situation around, overcome your laziness (or be it fear or scruple) and become one who strives to make people around smarter. It's not enough to be just smart; it's often about being both smart and willing to get engaged.

The funny thing about this whole story is that, until some moment, I didn't care much about making other people smarter. I was obsessed with the idea that I myself has to be smarter first to then tech people. It's not true. Moreover, it's impossible. So many ways other people can be more proficient or have some peculiar knowledge or skills you wouldn't ever imagine. So the right motivation isn't being smarter rather than being able to get smarter and transit the knowledge to those around you.